README.md, before:

Cause of Why
============

The goal of this project is to implement a Question Answering (QA)
system that answers causal type questions. We use Wikipedia as a
knowledge base, extracting answers to user questions from the articles.

This project is currently under fast-paced active development. Currently
we are focused on getting the system's engine working, so the user
interface is on the back burner right now. Please stay tuned for lots of
updates!

Causal Questions
----------------

Causal questions are generally why-questions. They ask for a reason or a
cause, such as "Why do birds sing?". This differs from other QA systems,
which usually try to answer factoid questions, such as "Where is the
Louvre located?".

Required Libraries
------------------

This project uses several libraries that either need to be installed or
need to be present in the project's `lib/` directory. The following is a
list of the required libraries, as well as at least one way (source) to
obtain the library.

### nltk

Natural Language Processing (NLP) functions such as sentence
segmentation, word tokenization, and more.

* <http://nltk.org/install.html>

### gensim

Some useful Information Retrieval (IR) algorithms including string to
vector functions and similarity queries such as TF-IDF. Also implements
topic modelling such as Latent Semantic Analysis.

* <http://radimrehurek.com/gensim/install.html>

### unidecode

Converts unicode strings to closest ASCII equivalent.

* <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/Unidecode>
* git clone http://www.tablix.org/~avian/git/unidecode.git

### Tornado

Provides a web server interface.

* <http://www.tornadoweb.org/>
* <https://github.com/facebook/tornado>

### WikiExtractor.py

Converts text from MediaWiki markup format to plain text.

* <http://medialab.di.unipi.it/wiki/Wikipedia_extractor>

Commit message:

Add: NLTK data requirement for POS tagger
In addition to installing the NLTK library, several resources need to be
downloaded separately. There are some additional resources that are not
yet mentioned, so it is a TODO item to add the other resources that the
project needs.

README.md, after:

Cause of Why
============

The goal of this project is to implement a Question Answering (QA)
system that answers causal type questions. We use Wikipedia as a
knowledge base, extracting answers to user questions from the articles.

This project is currently under fast-paced active development. Currently
we are focused on getting the system's engine working, so the user
interface is on the back burner right now. Please stay tuned for lots of
updates!

Causal Questions
----------------

Causal questions are generally why-questions. They ask for a reason or a
cause, such as "Why do birds sing?". This differs from other QA systems,
which usually try to answer factoid questions, such as "Where is the
Louvre located?".

Required Libraries
------------------

This project uses several libraries that either need to be installed or
need to be present in the project's `lib/` directory. The following is a
list of the required libraries, as well as at least one way (source) to
obtain the library.

### nltk

Natural Language Processing (NLP) functions such as sentence
segmentation, word tokenization, and more.

* <http://nltk.org/install.html>

#### nltk resources

In addition, you will need to download several nltk resources using
nltk.download() after you have the nltk library installed.

* 'taggers/maxent_treebank_pos_tagger/english.pickle'

### gensim

Some useful Information Retrieval (IR) algorithms including string to
vector functions and similarity queries such as TF-IDF. Also implements
topic modelling such as Latent Semantic Analysis.

* <http://radimrehurek.com/gensim/install.html>

### unidecode

Converts unicode strings to closest ASCII equivalent.

* <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/Unidecode>
* git clone http://www.tablix.org/~avian/git/unidecode.git

### Tornado

Provides a web server interface.

* <http://www.tornadoweb.org/>
* <https://github.com/facebook/tornado>

### WikiExtractor.py

Converts text from MediaWiki markup format to plain text.

* <http://medialab.di.unipi.it/wiki/Wikipedia_extractor>
